TOOLS USED:


CODE USED:

Smalltalk globals

self at: #Point

SCRIPT:

In this video we will look at how we can use the Inspector to navigate inside
the system and understand pieces of it.

The inspector works as a microscope to explore through the system. We can modify
pieces of it and see how they react to change.

[[[Playground
Smalltalk globals
]]]

We will look at the Smalltalk globals, the space where all the classes are kept.
It is a dictionary that you can explore within the Inspector

RAW >> BREAKPOINT

You can see it is a big array with explanations for all the classes. When
looking at the class Breakpoint, you can see it is a global variable in the
side panel.

We can see it is composed of a key and value. Clicking on it brings
us to a ByteSymbol, #Breakpoint. The associated value is the actual Breakpoint
class.

KEY > METHOD DICT

It helps you navigate through the class tree and restrict the flow with the
points below.

A nice thing to know is that you can add a new branch to the exploration flow.
For example, if we go back to the beginning,

[[[
self at: #Point
]]]
DO IT AND GO

You just plugged a piece of code to the navigation. We now have an Inspector on
the class "Point". This inspection will bring out the tabs related to classes.
"RAW" will show you the Pharo implementation,
"DEFINITION" brings out the way it is defined,
"COMMENT" shows the comment,
"REFERENCES" presents all the differences associated, (Point used in @)

Going back to the "RAW" tab and looking at the method dictionary, you can see
a dictionary holding keys being the names of the methods and values the
compiled methods. The "RAW" tab now shows how the dictionary method. We would
rather see what the methods are and this can be seen in the "ITEMS" tab and
clicking on one of them.

For example, "degrees" will output a CompiledMethod that can be seen differently
by the Inspector. We can see that the CompiledMethod consists of an array of
bytecode and literals. The literals are all the names contained in the body of
the method. In the beginning of the CompiledMethod, you can see all the different
literals. The bytecode can reference those literals in the execution.

Looking at the "BYTECODE" tab, you can see the instructions and their literals.
Instructions such as pushing literals on the execution stack, sending messages
etc.

Duplicating the view with one tab on BYTECODE and one on SOURCE will help you
see what the source code expressions translate into. This view is extremely
handy for the people developing the compiler.

Another combo that is handy is the AST and SOURCE. Clicking on elements of the
tree will highlight the counterpart piece of source code.

This tool and approach can be used by developers of the compiler. Even for your
objects, you can extend the inspector to display interesting information about
your object and its behaviour.
